Data governance is all about managing data well, but data governance is not restricted to only data management.
when data is managed well, it can drive innovation and growth and can be an enterprise’s most abundant and important lever for success.
Successful data governance also means that data risks can be minimized, and data compliance and regulatory requirements can be met with ease
All businesses generate, process, use, and store data as a result of their daily operations.

Data Governance Versus Data Management
Data governance is focused on roles and responsibilities, policies, definitions, metrics, and the lifecycle of data. 
Data management is the technical implementation of data governance

The Value of Data Governance
If an organization considers data to be a priority and it puts in place processes and policies to leverage the data’s value and reduce data risks, 
that organization is demonstrating a strong commitment to data controls and accountabilities. 
In other words, that organization values data governance.
Data governance does not emerge by chance. It’s a choice and requires organizational commitment and investment.

Creating a Data Governance Program

Defining the vision, goals, and benefits.
Analyzing the current state of data governance and management.
Developing a proposal based on the first two steps, including a draft plan.
Achieving leadership approval.
Designing and developing the program.
Implementing the program.
Monitoring and measuring performance.
Maintaining the program.

Each organization will approach data governance in a manner that best reflects the desired outcomes.
In summary, data governance is about managing data well and helping to deliver its optimum value to your organization.
It includes ensuring your data is available, usable, and secure. 
It’s the actions that team members take, the policies and processes they must follow, and the use of technologies that support them throughout the data lifecycle in their organization.





